Now that we have a basic overview of the value of each Bitcoin core network,
we can dive a little further into the details of each.
This helps you so you'll know not only why each network was built,
but some of the specific functionality behind why you might choose one over the other.
In this video, we'll focus specifically on comparing the mainnet to the testnet.
We'll walk you through each item listed here on the left
to help you get a better idea of how they compare to one another.
To start, remember that the Bitcoin mainnet is
the primary network where live transaction take place.
This live network isn't the ideal place though to build and test applications.
To do this, the testnet was created.
The testnet is an alternative Bitcoin blockchain
that provides a test environment for applications.
This helps reduce risks and limitations associated with Bitcoin core.
Now, how do they compare?
First, we know that the mainnet is for deploying live applications for production,
while the testnet is only used for testing purposes.
Next, both of these networks are public environments,
that means that when you're using them you'll interact with a network of
peers that create and validate information on the blockchain.
But there's a difference in who makes up the peers in the network.
While anyone can join either or both networks,
they're entirely separate from one another.
They are different chains with
different peers and joining one doesn't mean you're part of the other.
This has an effect on the size of each network.
The Bitcoin mainnet is much larger with more peers and more blocks.
To download the full mainnet would take over 200 gigabytes of space right now,
while the testnet is closer to around 15 gigs.
These will both continue to grow over time and it's most
likely that the testnet will continue to stay smaller than the mainnet.
But there's no limit to how large either of these can get.
Remember, the size will keep growing because all data is held forever
on the chain and more blocks are added as more transactions take place.
The time to create a block is similar on both networks.
In each case, it takes approximately 10 minutes to create a block and that's
because in both cases blocks are both created and validated by nodes within the network.
That means that it still takes time for a transaction to go
through each step in the life cycle and this takes about 10 minutes.
One major difference between each of these networks is the value of the currency.
Bitcoin on their mainnet are worth their full
value but testnet coins are not worth anything at all.
One quick thing to note here is there have been times that
users have tried to collect and sell testnet coins.
Since there's a limited number of coins in the testnet,
just like there are limited number in the mainnet,
if people collect these coins it makes it more
difficult for others to continue testing on that network.
Because of this, developers have wiped out the entire collection of coins
to start again from scratch to begin redistributing these testnet coins.
This has happened twice so far which has brought us to the third generation of testnet.
So if you look around and start to see testnet three, that's what that refers to.
Public keys on the testnet have been
differentiated from those on the mainnet by starting with the letters
m or n. This helps users see whether they
are interacting with the testnet key or a mainnet key.
Finally, the block difficulty is different between each of these networks.
On the main net, the block difficulty self-adjusts as blocks are
created to try to maintain a block creation rate of about one block every 10 minutes,
on the testnet the same thing is happening.
The difference here though is that
less computing power is dedicated to maintaining this smaller network.
To maintain a block creation rate of around 10 minutes,
the block difficulty has been lowered to approximately half of what it is on the mainnet.
So, that's how the mainnet and the testnet compare across these A characteristics.
The core difference is that the mainnet is for live production,
while the testnet is for application, creation and testing.
The rest of the differences stem from this core idea,
to help facilitate the networks used cases.
Later on, we'll be spending a lot of time in
the testnet to help build and test applications.